.. _containerized:

LNST in containers
==================
LNST supports running both agents and controller in containers at the host machine.
LNST uses custom RPC protocol to communicate between controller and agents which 
uses separate network interface to not interfere with test and so, it doesn't matter
where controller and agents are running as long as they can communicate.

With support of running LNST in containers your machine setup might look like this:

1. both controller and agents are running on your baremetal machines

2. controller is running on your baremetal machine and agents are running in containers

3. controller is running in container and agents are running on your baremetal machine

4. both controller and agents are running in containers


This article describes how to run individual parts of LNST in containers. If you want
to run either controller or agents on baremetal see :ref:`installation` section.


Common requirements
-------------------
We recommend to use Podman as this was developed and tested with Podman but should
work with Docker as well.

If you want to use Podman, follow installation steps on
`official Podman installation page <https://podman.io/getting-started/installation>`_.


.. _containerized_agents:

Containerized agents
--------------------

Containers and networks are dynamically created based on recipe requirements.
Containers are also automatically connected to networks.

Requirements
````````````
The first requirement is **Podman**, follow installation steps on
`official Podman installation page <https://podman.io/getting-started/installation>`_.


Container Networking
--------------------

LNST ContainerPoolManager supports 3 different plugins to generate the networks defined in Recipe Requirements.

The first two plugins are podman native plugins `netavark` and `CNI`.

The final plugin is the recently added `custom_lnst`. This plugin has no
requirements on your system or it's configuration, it utilizes `ip-route`
commands to build a network using `veth` and `bridge` interfaces manually. So
the only requirement here is to run the recipe with root privileges.

To select which plugin is used for networking you can change the value of the
`network_plugin` argument when creating the `Controller` class:

  .. code-block:: python

    ctl = Controller(
        poolMgr=ContainerPoolManager,
        mapper=ContainerMapper,
        network_plugin="custom_lnst",
    )

CNI system configuration
````````````````````````

To use `CNI` you may need to adjust the systemwide container configurations.

1. Remove all the LNST's leftovers from `/etc/cni/net.d/lnst_*.conflist` if you already tried to run LNST

2. Set default network backend to `cni`, add following block to `containers.conf` -
`documentation <https://github.com/containers/common/blob/main/docs/containers.conf.5.md>`_:

  .. code-block:: toml

    [network]
    network_backend="cni"

3. Install `CNI` plugins:

  .. code-block:: bash

    dnf install containernetworking-plugins

4. Start your Podman instance

Enabling Podman API service:
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Podman API is also required, follow the steps below:

.. code-block:: bash

    systemctl enable --now podman.socket

and get socket URL:

.. code-block:: bash

    systemctl status podman.socket | grep "Listen:"

Starting Podman API manually:
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
If you don't want to run Podman API as a service, you can start it manually.
Don't forget to run the command below with root privileges.

.. code-block:: bash

    podman system service --timeout 0 --log-level=debug

Socket URL could be found at the top of logs generated by this command.

The usual URL is `unix:/run/podman/podman.sock`

Build LNST agent image
``````````````````````
Currently, LNST does not support automated building, so build LNST agent
machine image.

Podman uses different `storage <https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman.1.html#root-value>`_ locations
for root-full and root-less images, so make sure
you build image to root-full storage.
LNST currently uses the default storage location.
Build context should be a directory, where your LNST project is located.

*Your local copy of LNST is used by agents in containers.*

Use -t argument to name your image, this name is later used.

.. code-block:: bash

    cd your_lnst_project_directory
    podman build . -t lnst -f container_files/agent/Dockerfile


Now is everything ready to run LNST in containers.
For testing purposes, we can use `HelloWorldRecipe` from :ref:`hello-world-script`.

Only initialization of `Controller()` object has to be changed:

.. code-block:: python

    from lnst.Controller.MachineMapper import ContainerMapper
    from lnst.Controller.ContainerPoolManager import ContainerPoolManager

    podman_uri = ""  # podman URI from installation step above
    image_name = ""  # name of image from build step above
    ctl = Controller(poolMgr=ContainerPoolManager, mapper=ContainerMapper, podman_uri=podman_uri, image=image_name)


And run the script.

Classes documentation
`````````````````````
.. autoclass:: lnst.Controller.MachineMapper.ContainerMapper
    :members:


.. automodule:: lnst.Controller.ContainerPoolManager
    :members: ContainerPoolManager


Containerized controller
------------------------

Using containerized agents
``````````````````````````

Before proceeding with containerized controller, you need to build LNST
agent image (see :ref:`containerized_agents`) you also need to provide
following parameters as environment variables to controller container:

* `PODMAN_URI` - URI to Podman socket, e.g. `tcp://localhost[:port]`. This needs to be accessible from container.
* `IMAGE_NAME` - name of the image you built for agents.

It expects that you use CNI as network backend for Podman.


Test environment description
````````````````````````````

Instead of manually creating machine pool XMLs, you can provide a test environment
description file (``test_environment.json``). The controller generates pool XMLs
from it at startup.

The file must be located at ``/lnst/container_files/controller/pool/test_environment.json``
inside the container (see ``test_environment.example.json`` for reference):

.. code-block:: bash

    podman run -v /path/to/test_environment.json:/lnst/container_files/controller/pool/test_environment.json:ro ...

Format:

.. code-block:: json

    [
        {
            "test_system_name": "host1",
            "hostname": "machine1.example.com",
            "ssh_port": 22,
            "username": "root",
            "password": "",
            "test_nic_hw_addrs": [
                "00:00:5e:00:53:01"
            ]
        },
        {
            "test_system_name": "host2",
            "hostname": "machine2.example.com",
            "ssh_port": 22,
            "username": "root",
            "password": "",
            "test_nic_hw_addrs": [
                "00:00:5e:00:53:02"
            ]
        }
    ]

Fields:

* ``test_system_name`` — unique identifier for the machine (used in pool XML filename)
* ``hostname`` — FQDN or IP of the remote host
* ``ssh_port`` — SSH port
* ``username`` — SSH username
* ``password`` — SSH password (leave empty for key-based authentication)
* ``test_nic_hw_addrs`` — list of MAC addresses of NICs used for testing (verified at startup)


.. _automatic-agent-setup:

Automatic agent setup
``````````````````````

When a test environment description file is present, the controller container
automatically sets up LNST agents on remote hosts at startup. For each host
defined in ``test_environment.json``, the container:

1. Connects via SSH using credentials from the test environment description
2. Runs ``setup_agent.sh`` remotely — installs LNST agent, its dependencies,
   and starts the ``lnst-agent`` systemd service

The agent is installed using the same LNST version as the controller (determined
by the ``LNST_SRC`` build argument). If the agent is already running on a host,
the setup is skipped.

SSH authentication uses either the password from the test environment description
file or SSH keys mounted into the container (e.g. ``-v machine_keys/:/root/.ssh:ro``).

.. note::
   Remote hosts must be reachable from the container via SSH. If using the default
   network mode, you may need ``--network=host`` for the container.

Using baremetal agents
``````````````````````
If you decide to run agents on baremetal machines, you can either provide
a test environment description (see above) or prepare machine pool XMLs manually
(see :ref:`machines-pool`) and mount them into the container at runtime.

Mount your pool directory to ``/root/.lnst/pool/`` in the container (read-only
access is sufficient):

.. code-block:: bash

    podman run -v /path/to/pool:/root/.lnst/pool:ro ... lnst_controller

.. warning::
   If SELinux is enforcing on the host, mounted volumes may not be accessible from inside the
   container. The container runner will detect this on startup and print an error message.
   To fix this, you can:

   * add the ``:z`` or ``:Z`` suffix to the volume mount (e.g. ``-v /host/path:/container/path:z``)
     to let Podman relabel the directory automatically
   * relabel the host directory manually with ``chcon -Rt svirt_sandbox_file_t /host/path``
   * disable SELinux label confinement for the container with ``--security-opt label=disable``


Build and run controller
````````````````````````

Build the controller image:

.. code-block:: bash

    podman build -t lnst_controller -f container_files/controller/Dockerfile .

The image clones LNST from ``https://github.com/LNST-project/lnst.git`` into
``/lnst`` inside the container and installs its dependencies.

Pinning LNST version
+++++++++++++++++++++

By default, the image clones the latest version of LNST. To pin to a specific
git reference, use the ``LNST_SRC`` build argument:

.. code-block:: bash

    podman build --build-arg LNST_SRC="https://github.com/LNST-project/lnst.git@<ref>" \
        -t lnst_controller -f container_files/controller/Dockerfile .

Where ``<ref>`` can be a commit hash, branch name, or tag.

The same ``LNST_SRC`` value is also used to install matching LNST version on
remote agents (see `Automatic agent setup`_).

.. note::
   If you want to use a local copy of LNST (e.g. during development), you can mount
   your project directory to ``/lnst`` in the container. The LNST virtual environment is
   located outside of ``/lnst/``, so if your changes require reinstallation of LNST
   and/or its dependencies, you need to rebuild the image.

.. note::
   The machine pool is **not** baked into the image. You must mount it at runtime
   (see `Using baremetal agents`_ above).


Before running the container, you need to provide environment variables:

* `RECIPE` - name of recipe class, these are loaded from `lnst.Recipes.ENRT` as wildcard import
* `RECIPE_PARAMS` - `;` separated list of parameters for recipe. Each parameter is in format `key=value`
* `FORMATTERS` - `;` separated list of formatters, these are loaded from `lnst.Formatters` as wildcard import
* `DEBUG` - enables/disables LNST's debug mode

.. warning::
   `RECIPE`, `RECIPE_PARAMS` and `FORMATTERS` are parsed using Python's `eval` function,
   which is a security risk. Make sure you trust the source of these variables.

Using the test database
+++++++++++++++++++++++

Instead of specifying ``RECIPE`` and ``RECIPE_PARAMS`` environment variables, you can
define a list of tests in ``container_files/controller/test_db.json``. When the ``RECIPE``
environment variable is **not** set, the container runner will automatically execute all
tests defined in ``test_db.json`` in order.

The location of the test database can be overridden with the ``TEST_DB`` environment
variable. This accepts a local file path or an HTTP(S) URL:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Local file (default)
    podman run -e TEST_DB=/path/to/my_tests.json ...

    # Remote URL
    podman run -e TEST_DB=https://server/tests.json ...

Each entry in the JSON array is an object with the following keys:

* ``uuid`` -- (optional) unique identifier for the test. When set, the results directory for this test uses the UUID as its name instead of the default ``{index}_{recipe_name}`` format.
* ``recipe_name`` -- string name of the recipe class (loaded from ``lnst.Recipes.ENRT``)
* ``params`` -- object of parameters to pass to the recipe constructor

Example ``test_db.json``:

.. code-block:: json

    [
        {
            "uuid": "a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-abcd-ef1234567890",
            "recipe_name": "SimpleNetworkRecipe",
            "params": {
                "perf_iterations": 1,
                "perf_duration": 10,
                "driver": "ice"
            }
        },
        {
            "recipe_name": "BondRecipe",
            "params": {
                "bonding_mode": "active-backup",
                "miimon_value": 5,
                "driver": "ice"
            }
        }
    ]

Tests run sequentially and each test is independent -- a failure in one test does not
prevent subsequent tests from running. A summary of pass/fail results is printed at the
end of the run.

To use the test database, ``RECIPE`` and ``RECIPE_PARAMS`` must not be set.

Exporting results
+++++++++++++++++

Results are automatically exported to ``/root/.lnst/results/`` inside the container.
Each recipe run gets its own subdirectory (e.g. ``0_SimpleNetworkRecipe/``) containing:

* ``controller.log`` -- human-readable log with debug-level output
* ``run-data-{i}.json`` -- JSON-formatted results for each recipe run
* ``run-data-{i}.lrc`` -- pickled/compressed run data for each recipe run

At the end of execution, all result directories are zipped into ``results.zip``
and verified for integrity.

To access results on the host, mount a volume to ``/root/.lnst/results/``:

.. code-block:: bash

    podman run -e DEBUG=1 -v /host/path/to/results:/root/.lnst/results --rm --name lnst_controller lnst_controller

Now, you can run the controller:

.. code-block:: bash

    podman run -e RECIPE=SimpleNetworkRecipe -e RECIPE_PARAMS="perf_iterations=1;perf_duration=10" -e DEBUG=1 -v /path/to/pool:/root/.lnst/pool:ro --rm --name lnst_controller lnst_controller


.. note::
   Podman containers are by default NATed, so you may need to use some other `--network` mode
   to make agent machines reachable from controller container. If agent machines are reachable
   from your host machine, `--network=host` should do the job. Read
   `Podman's documentation <https://github.com/containers/podman/blob/main/docs/tutorials/basic_networking.md#basic-network-setups>`_
   first.


Or you can run more complex recipes:

.. code-block:: bash

    podman run -e RECIPE=XDPDropRecipe -e RECIPE_PARAMS="perf_iterations=1;perf_tool_cpu=[0,1];multi_dev_interrupt_config={'host1':{'eth0':{'cpus':[0],'policy':'round-robin'}}}" -v /path/to/pool:/root/.lnst/pool:ro --rm --name lnst_controller lnst_controller


Classes documentation
`````````````````````
.. autoclass:: container_files.controller.container_runner.ContainerRunner
    :members:
